# Biological and Clinical Effects of Canakinumab in Patients with Lower-Risk Myelodysplastic Syndromes: Results from a Phase 2 Trial

## Abstract
Interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β)-induced inflammasome activation contributes to cancer initiation and progression. In myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), the IL-1β pathway is significantly upregulated, and previous studies using mouse models of founder MDS mutations, such as TET2 mutations, demonstrated that it enhances hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells’ (HSPCs’) aberrant differentiation towards the myeloid lineage at the expense of erythropoiesis. Thus, there is an urgent need to understand whether targeting the IL-1β signaling pathway can rescue ineffective erythropoiesis in patients with MDS. 
We designed a phase 2 clinical trial to evaluate the safety profile and efficacy of the IL-1β inhibitor canakinumab in previously treated lower-risk MDS patients (NCT04239157). We enrolled 25 patients with a median age of 74 years; 60% were male, 16% had lower-risk MDS, 84% had intermediate-1 risk MDS according to the International Prognostic Scoring System score, and 80% failed hypomethylating agent therapy. Canakinumab was well-tolerated, and no treatment-related side effects were observed in the study population. According to the 2006 International Working Group response criteria, the overall response rate was 17.4%, with all responses including hematological improvement. To evaluate the biological effects of canakinumab on hematopoiesis, we performed sequential prospective single-cell RNA sequencing analyses of HSPCs and bone marrow mononuclear cells at different time points during therapy. Our analyses showed that canakinumab’s on-target effects in hematopoietic populations expressing the IL-1β receptor (IL-1R1) significantly decreased the TNF-mediated inflammatory signaling pathway but rescued ineffective erythropoiesis only in the context of lower genetic complexity.
This study has important clinical and biological implications because it demonstrates that better stratification strategies based on immune profiles could target lower-risk MDS patients more effectively.

## Single cell RNA Sequencing datasets
The fastq files and raw count expression matrices of the scRNA-seq datasets are available in GEO accession [GSE237148](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE237148).
Additionally, we provide Seurat objects to facilitate the reproduction of the results presented in the paper. The Seurat objects used for Figures 3B, 3E, 4A, and 4C can be downloaded [here](https://ucla.box.com/s/ughct1z5loius7s02f6spc95gpsv3mkc). All plots can be recreated using standard [Seurat](https://satijalab.org/seurat/) scripts.


